docs(testing): adding WebdriverIO docs (#1346)
ionic-team/stencil-site: docs/testing/webdriverio/02-unit-testing.md

---
title: Unit Testing
sidebar_label: Unit Testing
description: Unit Testing
slug: /testing/webdriverio/unit-testing
---

# Unit Testing

WebdriverIO makes it easy to unit test components and app utility functions in the browser. Unit tests validate the code in isolation. Well written tests are fast, repeatable, and easy to reason about. It tries to follow a simple guiding principle: the more your tests resemble the way your software is used, the more confidence they can give you.

### Test Setup

> To resemble how your component is being used as close as possible to reality we need to render it into an actual DOM tree. WebdriverIO provides a helper package for this that you can use called `@wdio/browser-runner/stencil`. It exports a `render ` method that allows us to mount our component to the DOM.

Reviewer: Minor non-blocking nit
```suggestion
To resemble how your component is being used as close as possible to reality we need to render it into an actual DOM tree. WebdriverIO provides a helper package for this that you can use called `@wdio/browser-runner/stencil`. It exports a `render` method that allows us to mount our component to the DOM.
```

For example, given the following component:

```ts reference title="/src/components/my-component/my-component.tsx"
https://github.com/webdriverio/component-testing-examples/blob/main/stencil-component-starter/src/components/my-component/my-component.tsx
```

We import the component into our test to render it in the browser:

```ts reference title="/src/components/my-component/my-component.test.tsx"
https://github.com/webdriverio/component-testing-examples/blob/main/stencil-component-starter/src/components/my-component/my-component.test.tsx#L2-L18
```

> You can find more information about the `render` methods option and its return object in the WebdriverIO [documentation](https://webdriver.io/docs/component-testing/stencil#render-options).

Reviewer: Between these docs linked here and this page, it's not clear if I need to register child components in `render`'s `components` field. If I have a `my-component` that renders another component `my-child`, would I need to register `my-child` as well here if I were testing `my-component`?

Author: That's a good point. I highlighted that it provides flexibility to leave out components that have side effects and can cause flakiness:

<img width="755" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-08 at 11 17 08 AM" src="https://github.com/ionic-team/stencil-site/assets/731337/a4db875a-615a-48d4-bf3b-86d02e4edbb0">

### Handle Asynchronicity

Instead of directly working on DOM objects, with WebdriverIO you are interacting with references of DOM nodes and interact through WebDriver commands that are async. Make sure you always use an `await` to ensure that all commands and assertion are executed sequentially.

:::info

> Missing an `await` can be a simple oversight and can cause us long hours of debugging. To avoid this and ensure promises are handled properly, it is recommended to use an ESLint rule called [`require-await`](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/require-await).

Reviewer 2: Ooh nice, we'll wanna recommend this in Playwright too. Sean said Framework has a lint rule, but idk if they used a published rule or rolled their own.

:::

> ### Matcher

Reviewer: Minor grammatical nit
```suggestion
### Matchers
```

> WebdriverIO provides their own matcher to assert an element in various ways. We recommend to use them over synchronous matcher like `toBe` or `toEqual` as they allow for retries and make your tests more resilient against flakiness.

Reviewer: Minor grammatical nit
```suggestion
WebdriverIO provides their own matchers to assert an element in various ways. We recommend to use them over synchronous matchers like `toBe` or `toEqual` as they allow for retries and make your tests more resilient against flakiness.
```

For example, instead of asserting the content of a component like this:

```ts
expect(await $('my-component').getText()).toBe(`Hello, World! I'm Stencil 'Don't call me a framework' JS`)
```

> It is better to use WebdriverIOs matcher for asserting text:

Reviewer: Minor grammatical nit:
```suggestion
It is better to use WebdriverIOs matchers for asserting text:
```

```ts
await expect($('my-component')).toHaveText(`Hello, World! I'm Stencil 'Don't call me a framework' JS`)
```

> You can read more about WebdriverIOs specific matcher, in the project [documentation](https://webdriver.io/docs/api/expect-webdriverio).

Reviewer: Minor grammatical nit:
```suggestion
You can read more about WebdriverIOs specific matchers, in the project [documentation](https://webdriver.io/docs/api/expect-webdriverio).
```

---
title: Unit Testing
sidebar_label: Unit Testing
description: Unit Testing
slug: /testing/webdriverio/unit-testing
---

# Unit Testing

WebdriverIO makes it easy to unit test components and app utility functions in the browser. Unit tests validate the code in isolation. Well written tests are fast, repeatable, and easy to reason about. It tries to follow a simple guiding principle: the more your tests resemble the way your software is used, the more confidence they can give you.

### Test Setup

> To resemble how your component is being used as close as possible to reality we need to render it into an actual DOM tree. WebdriverIO provides a helper package for this that you can use called `@wdio/browser-runner/stencil`. It exports a `render` method that allows us to mount our component to the DOM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For a test to resemble as much as possible how your component is used in an actual application we need to render it into an actual DOM tree. WebdriverIO provides a helper package for this that you can use called `@wdio/browser-runner/stencil`. It exports a `render` method that allows us to mount our component to the DOM.
```

For example, given the following component:

```ts reference title="/src/components/my-component/my-component.tsx"
https://github.com/webdriverio/component-testing-examples/blob/main/stencil-component-starter/src/components/my-component/my-component.tsx
```

We import the component into our test to render it in the browser:

```ts reference title="/src/components/my-component/my-component.test.tsx"
https://github.com/webdriverio/component-testing-examples/blob/main/stencil-component-starter/src/components/my-component/my-component.test.tsx#L2-L18
```

> If your component under test uses other Stencil components make sure you add these to the `components` list to. For example, let's say `ComponentA` uses `ComponentB` which also imports `ComponentC` and `ComponentD`. In this case you will have to import and pass in all components you like to have rendered, e.g.:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If your component under test uses other Stencil components make sure you add these to the `components` list as well. For example, let's say `ComponentA` uses `ComponentB` which also imports `ComponentC` and `ComponentD`. In this case you will have to import and pass in all components you'd like to have rendered, e.g.:
```

```ts
render({
    components: [ComponentA, ComponentB, ComponentC, ComponentD],
    template: () => <component-a first="Stencil" last="'Don't call me a framework' JS" />
});
```

While this seems tedious at first, it gives you the flexibility to leave out components that are not relevant for your test, or have side effects that can cause flakiness.

Find more information about the `render` method option and its return object in the WebdriverIO [documentation](https://webdriver.io/docs/component-testing/stencil#render-options).

> ### Handle Asynchronicity

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Handling Asynchronicity
```

> Instead of directly working on DOM objects, with WebdriverIO you are interacting with references of DOM nodes and interact through WebDriver commands that are async. Make sure you always use an `await` to ensure that all commands and assertion are executed sequentially.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Instead of directly working on DOM objects, with WebdriverIO you interact with references to DOM nodes through asynchronous WebDriver commands. Make sure you always use an `await` to ensure that all commands and assertion are executed sequentially.
```

:::info

Missing an `await` can be a simple oversight and can cause us long hours of debugging. To avoid this and ensure promises are handled properly, it is recommended to use an ESLint rule called [`require-await`](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/rules/require-await).

:::

### Matchers

> WebdriverIO provides their own matchers to assert an element in various ways. We recommend to use them over synchronous matchers like `toBe` or `toEqual` as they allow for retries and make your tests more resilient against flakiness.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
WebdriverIO provides their own matchers to make various assertions about an element. We recommend these over synchronous matchers like `toBe` or `toEqual` as they allow for retries and make your tests more resilient against flakiness.
```

For example, instead of asserting the content of a component like this:

```ts
expect(await $('my-component').getText())
    .toBe(`Hello, World! I'm Stencil 'Don't call me a framework' JS`)
```

It is better to use WebdriverIOs matchers for asserting text:

```ts
await expect($('my-component'))
    .toHaveText(`Hello, World! I'm Stencil 'Don't call me a framework' JS`)

> ```

Reviewer 3: is this preferable just because it will retry if there's no textContent yet, or something along those lines?
